## __Are human beings doomed to vanish? A computational simulation on the Universe25 experiment__

### __1. Research Question__
Will exceeding social interactions result in interest loss in heterosexuals, unsuccess in forming group relationships, and eventually the termination of the whole society? This claim was originally made by John B. Calhoun, an American ethologist and behavioral researcher, from his mouse experiments, especially the "Utopia" Universe 25, raising debates in research fields. In this mini-project, I leveraged simulation methods to mimic the experiment, and reexamine the claim and possibility. 

### __2. Literature Review__
The human population has been increasing stably since world war II, taking the world from around three billion in 1960 to over seven billion in 2020. Food production is the main concern of population expanding when the number of populations outgrows our ability to generate food, resulting in widespread famine. However, John B. Calhoun proposed the negative impact of high population density with a resourceful environment: what will happen when all the appetites are catered for and all the needs are met in a society? The answer, according to his studies, was an awful lot of abnormal behaviors shortly followed by an apocalypse.

John B. Calhoun proposed "Behavioral Sink" in 1962, a term derived from a series of over-population experiments he and his researchers conducted on Norway rats between 1958 and 1962[[1]](#1). Calhoun and his team created a series of "rat utopias" in the experiments, offering them an environment with sufficient water and food and without predators, where they could expect unfettered population growth. However, he concluded that "when a population of laboratory rats is allowed to increase in a confined space, the rats develop acutely abnormal patterns of behavior that can even lead to the extinction of the population" on those rat experiments. 

He later performed similar experiments on mice from 1968 to 1972, and the most renowned one was published in the paper Death Squared: The Explosive Growth and Demise of a Mouse Population in 1973, where the Universe 25 was constructed [[2]](#2). "Universe 25" also provided an appropriate living space for the mice, with food, water, controlled temperature, and no predators. However, the observation of this artificial world did not follow an ordinary expectation. Calhoun marked the evolution of "Universe 25" through a series of phases: 

    Phase A: the initial period of adjustment to the environment.
    Phase B: a period of exponential growth among the mouse population.
    Phase C: the final period of growth among the mouse population.
    Phase D: the decline and extinction of the mouse population.

In the experiment, the population peaked at 2,200 mice (maximum capacity 3,840) and thereafter exhibited a variety of abnormal, often destructive behaviors, such as "males who failed withdrew physically and psychologically; they became very inactive and aggregated in large pools near the center of the floor of the universe. From this point on, the mice no longer initiated interaction with their established associates, nor did their behavior elicit attack by territorial males," and females no longer reproduced. By the 600th day, the population was on its way to extinction. Calhoun contributed the scenario to exceeding interaction, indicating that the mice were obsessed with mingling, while eventually backfired by over interaction once reaching their maximal social capacity. This explanation also provided a foundation for his behavioral sink theory: the resourceful and flocking environment offered a higher probability for the mice to interact with each other.

The years of 1960s to 1970s came at a time at which overpopulation had become a subject of great public interest. Due to the urbanization at the period, people surged into large cities to explore a better life, while the crowding also raised people’s concerns regarding negative effects on their living environment. Therefore, Universe 25 could ultimately serve as a metaphor for the trajectory of humanity and had a considerable cultural influence.

However, other research debated Calhoun’s claims and studies. Edmund Ramsden pointed out the results of the studies were very inconsistent [[3]](#3). Small positive correlations and other negative associations were both shown by several ecological studies. Furthermore, experimental laboratory studies also suggested inconsistent and insignificant results. Another research compared two environments in the college dormitory: one was a large corridor dormitory and the other was a suite-style, sub-divided community. In the corridor, students tended to perform poorly in health and academic success since they claimed perceiving the environment as crowded such that increasing the stress levels. Nonetheless, in the latter, they could reduce unwanted social interaction without significantly decreasing density through dividing the space, providing evidence that there was a solution for the society termination [[4]](#4). Similarly, a paper highlighted the need for experiments in both lab and field when looking at complex biological systems since it showcased that the hormone consumption in rodent animals was different by the environments. Human beings would then be more different from those animals in terms of hormone consumption, and thus the conclusion of the experiment might not directly apply to people [[5]](#5).

Despite the arguments from the aforementioned pieces of literature, none of them leveraged computational simulation to scale up and generalize the experiment. Therefore, it is worth using a computational methodology to review the experiment, and a dynamic agent-based model can simulate the individuals and society to offer a better understanding and potentially have a generalizable conclusion. With modeling, I could run more experiments and simulations than any of the aforementioned studies, hence, inspecting the claim of the behavioral sink and providing insights on the effect of over social interactions. With these tasks on hold, I decided to employ a model similar to dynamic models of segregation with specific adjustments to meet the setting of the Universe 25 experiemnt[[6]](#6).

### __3. Method__
(Please also see [Universe25.ipynb](Universe25.ipynb))

Simulations can be a useful tool for studying social processes, however, one caveat is that the discrepancy between individuals and the complex social structure cannot be easily captured by the model. Therefore, without loss of generalization, I simplified the setup by only maintaining the important features for the study.
Universe 25 guaranteed the mice would have sufficient food, drink, and space, so these factors would not be determinative points for the simulation. In the model, I set up the life, maturity time, fertilization time, gestation period based real statistical distribution of mice. I then randomly assigned social interaction capability to each agent. They needed to interact with neighbors within a certain grid distance, and each interaction would consume a point from social interaction capability. Female agents would get a chance to be pregnant after several numbers of interactions with male agents (the number is reversely calculated from the frequency of female mice's reproduction. A female mouse can get fertilized 5 to 10 times per year, and assume the bottom line is that she would interact with neighbors within 2 grid distance. She would then interact with 12 neighbors, and roughly half of them would be males. So the threshold of getting pregnant is $5*6$ to $10*6$.) If social interaction capability dropped below 0, female agents would not reproduce, and male agents would not interact with others. Through the setup, the model could simulate the original experiment without dumping too many crucial factors. I could then examine the competition between the species' reproduction rate and social interaction capacity loss; furthermore, see if it is possible to reconstruct a Universe 25. Finally, I adjusted initial population density and social interactional distance with 100 iterations on each since both factors would affect the interaction an agent could have. 

For the first experiment, the agents would interact with neighbors within a grid distance of 2, indicating they would at most have 12 interactions per step. Then I change the initial population density from 0.1 to 0.9, with a 0.1 interval each. For the second one, the socially interactable distance is 3, meaning they will have more chances to interact with others (at most 28 interactions per step); and I then changed the distance to 4 for further comparison. Through the hundreds of simulations, I could discern the overall pattern of overly social interaction, and the influence of initial population density and interaction rate. 

### __4. Discussion__
(Please see [images](images))

All experiments had gone through phase A, where they accustomed themselves to the environment, with the youngness mortality rate applied to them. So I could see a drop in population in the first several stages. In the first experiment, the initial population density of 0.1, the agents did not have much chance to interact, hence no reproduction, the population ended after all the living agents reached their life expectancy. This description was also true for the same density in experiments 2 and 3.

When the initial population density was between 0.6 to 0.9, the agents got more opportunities to mingle with others, rendering a higher probability to have a conception. Notice that most of the iterations met the maximal population, indicating the reproduction rate outcompeted the loss of social interaction capacity and fertility. The surge could be deemed phase B, while only a few continued with phase C, and the pattern of Universe 25 afterward. The density of 0.6 showcased more circumstances that the population grows to the middle of the space capacity then drops to a termination, followed by a similar but a tendency of a slightly fewer number in the population density of 0.7 to 0.9. This might elaborate that increasing the mingling rate could reversely help the group of species. With a fixed density in this interval, increasing the social interaction distance decreased the occurrence of Universe 25, which contradicted Calhoun’s assumption. Nonetheless, the difference between social interactional distance was not really significant.

Between the density from 0.2 to 0.5, more variations showed up. The majority pattern was a lack of interaction and termination afterward; however, as the density increased, more interaction brought about new reproduction and population growth. This phenomenon also contradicted Calhoun’s projection. On the other hand, several distinctions occurred in the Universe 25 pattern in different densities, and they were mainly having a population increasing then diving to extinct. Nonetheless, these cases only took a few parts of iterations, and the second largest group was still population explosion in this interval. Furthermore, there were also other patterns happening in the simulation without following Calhoun’s experiment, for instance, the population surged to the maximum after going down from the first or second peak, acting like a tug war between the loss of social interaction capacity and the gain of fertilization.

An interesting point was that the same density in different experiments tended to observe similar patterns. This similarity between different socially interactional distances might suggest the social interaction capacity loss was compensated or offset by the fertilization rate, and vice versa, which lands mitigation for the tragedy claimed by Calhoun.

It is nearly impossible to create a perfect simulation, so some limitations in this simulation might impact the original environment. First of all, I simplified the models and agent behaviors for computational and simulational feasibility. For instance, the eating and drinking did not show up in the model, by assuming all agents would have sufficient resources of such, hence the two factors would not have changed the model a lot. Furthermore, I did not incorporate all abnormal behaviors such as attacking others, isolating from the groups, etc. since it would be trivial and computationally intensive. Similarly, simulation models could not capture all the sophistication of social structure, for instance, mice with certain physical features tended to flock together or dominate other peers. Nevertheless, this project focused on exploring the effects of exceeding social interactions, thus the simplified model could still be of an appropriate representation. Also, the hundreds of iterations provided generalization and insights not elaborated in the past research.

Overall, the project did not align with Calhoun's experiments and conjectures since the tragedy of Universe 25 only took a fairly small portion of the simulations in some setups, even though the pattern of destruction spawned in some iterations (mainly density 0.2 to 0.5). But more importantly, the simulation highlighted that the majority outcomes of enough social interaction were population growth, and on the other hand extinction with a lack of interaction. The approaches also illustrated the potential of mitigating population decrease by increasing density or social interaction. Furthermore, the simulations suggested that even though social interaction might consume an agent's social activity quota, it also gave a higher probability for the species to reproduce and extend. This unstraightforward finding can offer researchers a new perspective to assess social density and interaction, and a relationship with the loss of interaction capability. Therefore, people do not need to hold a pessimistic view of the social density, which reflects the claims from some previous research against Calhoun's in a computational way.


### __Reference__

<a name="1">[1]</a> Calhoun, J. B. (1962). Population Density and Social Pathology. *Scientific American, 206*(2), 139–149. http://www.jstor.org/stable/24937233


<a name="2">[2]</a> Calhoun, J. B. (1973). Death squared: the explosive growth and demise of a mouse population.

<a name="3">[3]</a> Ramsden, E. (2011). Model organisms and model environments: A rodent laboratory in science, medicine and society. *Medical history, 55*(3), 365-368.

<a name="4">[4]</a> Baum, A., & Valins, S. (1977). *Architecture and social behavior: psychological study of social density.* New York: Wiley. 

<a name="5">[5]</a> Calisi, R. M., & Bentley, G. E. (2009). Lab and field experiments: are they the same animal?. *Hormones and behavior, 56*(1), 1-10.

<a name="6">[6]</a> Schelling, T. C. (1971). Dynamic models of segregation. *Journal of mathematical sociology, 1*(2), 143-186.